P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 1CHAPTERIN SEARCH OF IDEAL KNOTSPIOTR PIERAŃSKIDepartment of PhysicsPoznan University of TechnologyPiotrowo 3, 60 965 Poznan, PolandandInstitute of Molecular Physics,Smoluchowskiego 17, 60 159 PoznanE-mail: pieransk@phys.put.poznan.plA particular version of the knot tightening algorithm is described. It is shown that thealgorithm is able to remove empty loops and nugatory crossing leading to thesimplification of the conformation of any knot. The problem of finding the ground stateconformation of knots is discussed. Results of tightening various types of knots arepresented and analysed.1 IntroductionKnot is a closed, selfavoiding curve. From the topological point of view allconformations of the curve accessible via transformations during which no self-crossings occur are equivalent. From the point of a physicist, who thinks of the knotas a material object, whose points interact with forces stemming e.g. from a certainpotential field, different conformations of a knot may have different energies. In sucha case finding the ground state of the knot, i.e. the particular conformation at whichthe internal interaction energy reaches its minimum, is a challenging task. Ourinterest in the problem was stimulated by the seminal paper on the energy spectrumof knots and links by Moffat1. A rigorous treatment of various formulations of theenergy function and references concerning the history of the problem can be found inchapters by O`Hara and Diao et al. in this volume. Here, we shall limit ourselves butto the simplest case of the energy defined by the knot thickness. Putting aside allsubtleties of the definition, one can state that the scale invariant parameter whichdetermines in this case the knot energy (in what follows we shall refer to it as thethickness energy) is the ratio L/D, where L is the length of the rope (or tube) used totie a particular conformation of the knot and D is the diameter of the rope.The conformation at which the L/D parameter reaches its global minimum isthe  ground state of the knot. Knots in their ground state conformations aresometimes called ideal - term coined by Stasiak2. As it happens with ideal things, to
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 2reach ideal conformations of knots is not a trivial task: as we have found out, someof the ideal knots presented in Ref. 2 are in fact not ideal - we managed to findconformations for which values of the L/D parameter are smaller. But, are the valueswe managed to find the minimal ones? We cannot be sure. Thus, talking below lessabout the ideal knots we shall talk more about the tool we created to search for them.2 The knot inflation processLet K be a given knot type. Let CK be a particular, smooth conformation ofthe knot at each point r of which the tangent unit vector t is well defined. Imaginenow a process in which the curve CK is slowly inflated into a tube TK. At each point rof CK the crossection of the tube with a plane perpendicular to the tangent vector t isa disk of diameter D. If the curvature all along CK is finite and smaller than a certaincritical value, depending on the actual value of D , the tube the inflation processstarts without problems. Depending on the actual shape of  CK, overlaps betweendifferent segments of the tube, or at its strongly curved parts, will soon appear. If byan appropriate procedure modifying the shape of CK (keeping its length L fixed) theoverlaps are removed, the process of inflation can continue until the conformation ofthe knot reaches a limit state above which the newly created overlaps can no more beremoved.The knot inflation process was introduced independently by a fewauthors1,3,4,5. As easy to guess, instead of inflating the tube while keeping its lengthfixed, one can consider the complementary  process in which the length of the tube isreduced while its diameter is kept fixed. Below we present the Shrink-On-No-Overlaps (SONO) algorithm we developed during our studies of braids6.Our approach to the knot tightening process is experimental. It was not ouraim to create a universal, autonomous algorithm able to find on its own the globalground state conformation of any knot. What we were aiming at was rather thecreation of a virtual laboratory within which various experiments on knots could beperformed, among them - tightening. The SONO algorithm is one of the tools foundin the virtual laboratory. Other tools allow one to study various properties of theknots such as their curvature and twist maps, writhe and the average crossingnumber.It is interesting that laboratory experiments with tightening knots tied on a realrope of have been performed not by physicists but mathematicians. The experimentsare described in Ref. 4.
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 33 Shrink-On-No-Overlaps (SONO) ALGORITHMShrink-On-No-Overlaps algorithm is built from a number of procedures.Below we describe them one by one. Developing the SONO algorithm we tried tomake it as fast as possible, thus simplicity of the applied procedures was of primaryimportance.3.1 ControlLeashes (CL) procedure.For obvious reasons, in the numerical experiments described below knotsare discretised. Thus, let Pi , i=1..N, be equidistant points belonging to CK. In whatfollows we shall refer to them as the nodes. l=L/N denotes the length of leashes,which tie neighbouring nodes along the knot. The length of all leashes should beequal l. To keep an eye on it we defined a ControlLeashes procedure. It checks thedistance di,i+1 between i and i+1 node and corrects its length to the proper L/N value.If  di,i+1 <>l then nodes i and i+1 are symmetrically moved (away or towardstheir centre of mass) along the line which passes through them to positions at whichdi,i+1=l.The procedure starts at a randomly chosen node and runs, accordingly toanother random choice instruction, up or down around the chain of nodes.Obviously, the CL procedure defined in such a manner is not selfconsistent; after itssingle application the leashes are not of equal length. On the other hand, it is alsoobvious that its frequent application should reduce the dispersion of the leash length.It does.The CL procedure returns the lengths of the longest and shortest leashesfound within the chain. Monitoring the values one can estimate the actual dispersionof the leash lengths.3.2 FindNeighbours(FN) and  RemoveOverlaps (RO)proceduresNodes are points. To simulate a tube of diameter D we assume that each ofthe points is surrounded by a hard sphere of diameter D. As the number N of thenodes is large (or L is small) and the leash length l is smaller than D, the spheressurrounding consecutive nodes must be allowed to overlap. To achieve the aim, thehard core repulsion between spheres is defined in a particular manner: the spheresrepel each other only if their index distance is larger than a certain Skipped integer.The index distance between an i-th and k-th node is defined as the (smaller ofthe) number of leashes which separate nodes in question along the chain. A properchoice of the Skipped parameter is crucial. It should be larger than round(D/l). One
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 4should take into consideration situations in which the simulated tube makes thetightest U-turn        Fig. 1 (a) The discrete form of the 3.1 knot as seen by the SONO algorithm. The number ofnodes N=49 is about 3 times smaller than the normalised standard value round(10L/D). (b)The tight U-turn.The sphere located at the entrance to such a U-turn should be blind to overlapswith all spheres found within the turn and it should start repelling all spheres whichleft the turn. Since the length of the tightest U-turn equals πD/2, the proper Skippedvalue should be close to round(πD/2l). Removing overlaps which appear in the knot during its tightening process isthe most time consuming task. If the procedure which performs it is defined withoutimagination, its time consumption grows with N2. This happens if at each step of thetightening process possible overlaps of each node with each other node are checked.If the knot tightening process is slow, the evolution of the knot conformation issmooth and uniform and for a given node only a few nodes have a chance to overlapwith it. (By a node we mean here the sphere which surrounds it.) Thus, before theoverlap removing procedure is called, one should find for each node all nodes whichhave a chance to overlap with it. This task is performed by a FindNeighbours (FN)procedure which updates an integer array nn[1..N,1..m], whose i-th raw containsindexes of all nodes which are found within a distance smaller the (D+ε), where ε isa small parameter adjusted experimentally. At the entrance to the FN procedure thenn array is zeroed. Then, consecutive rows are filled in. If the length m of the rows ischosen large enough, at the end of the FN procedure the rows are found to be onlypartially filled in: they end with sequences of zeros.Assume that the nn array has been updated. Then, the RO procedure startsdetecting and removing overlaps. The check starts at a randomly chosen nodes and,according to another randomly chosen parameter, it runs up or down the chain ofnodes. For a given i-th node only the nodes whose indexes are found within the i-thraw of the nn array are checked for overlapping. If the spheres surrounding the i-thand j-th nodes are found to be overlapping, the nodes are shifted apart,
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 5symmetrically, along the line which joins their centres, to a distance (D+δ), where δis another experimentally adjusted parameter.  Putting δ>0 leaves some extra freespace between the shifted apart spheres. As found experimentally, this speeds up thetightening process.The FN procedure is called much less frequently then the CL and RO.Typically it is called only every 200 iteration steps.  As  in  the  case  of  the  CLprocedure, the RO procedure is not selfconsistent. Removing overlaps between twonodes may create overlaps with other neighbours of the moved nodes, however,repeated use of the procedure asymptotically removes all overlaps (if the knot is nottoo tight already). The state of overlaps found within the chain is monitored byfinding during the run of the RO procedure the values of the maximum and averageoverlaps.3.3 ShiftNodes (SN) procedure.As stated at the beginning, in the numerical experiments knots arerepresented by knotted, discrete chain of spherical beads threaded on CK.  Since thebeads are spherical, the surface of the chain is not smooth. To avoid jamming weintroduced into the SONO algorithm an additional procedure which shifts the beadsalong the CK thread by an incommensurate fraction of the internode (leash length)distance, left or right. New positions of the beads are calculated via a simple, linearinterpolation. The primary aim of the shifting procedure is to prevent jamming. Itssideeffect, which proved to be of great importance, is smoothening and cuttingcorners of  CK. The latter leads to some additional effects such as a rotation of theknot as a whole, which happens in the case of strongly chiral knots, e.g. the 3.1 knot.3.4 ReduceNodeNumber (RNN), DoubleNodeNumber (DNN) andNormalizeNodeNumber (NNN) procedures.Tightening a knot aimed at finding its global ground state is a difficultexperiment. It aims at minimising  Λ=L/D vs. C, where denotes the actualconformation of the knot. Unfortunately, for most knots the Λ(C)  function displays awhole set of local minima. Any procedure aimed at finding the global minimum mustbe able to get out of them. In the thermal bath based Monte Carlo algorithms such asthat used in Ref. 2, thermal fluctuations perform the task. In the mechanical knottightening process simulated with the SONO algorithm the mechanism is different.Experiments prove that reduction of the number of nodes and increasing the δparameter in the RO procedure allows one to cross some of the minima. We definedsimple procedures which reduce twice (RNN) or double (DNN) the number of
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 6nodes. The procedures are called, when necessary, by the operator performing thetightening experiment.To obtain comparable accuracy of parameters for different types of knots,we defined also a procedure (NNN) which normalises the node number to a commonstandard value depending on Λ. In all experiments described below we assumed thatthe standard number of nodes is equal round(10*Λ). This particular choice of thestandard node number is of course arbitrary.In addition to the procedures described above the numerical knot tighteningworkbench contains: procedures finding the total length L of the knot, its writhe Wrand the average crossing number ACN , the procedure finding and plotting thecurvature map τ and, finally, the procedure which plots the actual conformation ofthe knot. Images of the knot conformation are stored on the hard disk what at anystep of the tightening process allows the operator to call an animation procedurewhich displays the images in form of a short movie. Analysing the movie theoperator may estimate the effectiveness of the tightening process and check if theknot did not change its type.3.5 The core of the SONO algorithm.The general flow diagram of the SONO algorithm is as follows.1. The (x,y,z) coordinates of the nodes of a chosen knot are taken either fromthe procedure in which the knot is drawn with the mouse on the screen (theover- and undercrossings marked during the drawing process with mousekeys) or it is read from a file within which the coordinates were stored atone of the previous runs.2. The nn array containing indexes of the near neighbours is filled in with bythe FN procedure.3. The lengths of the internode leashes are corrected by the CL procedure.4. Overlaps are removed with the RO procedure.5. If the average overlap value is smaller than a certain (defined by theoperator) threshold, the knot is tightened: the (x,y,z) coordinates of thenodes and the leash length l are multiplied by a scaling factor s<1, whilethe diameter D  determining the overlapping remains unchanged.Steps 3, 4 and 5 are repeated NumOfIt times, NumOfIt being of order 10^2 -10^3, before the FN procedure used in step 2 is called again.
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 74 TESTS OF THE SONO ALGORITHM4.1 Untagling an entangled unknot.Any procedure aimed at searching for the global ground states of knots shouldbe able to perform such basic tasks as removing empty loops and nugatory crossingsfrom even the most entangled conformation of a knot. Fig. 2 demonstrates how theSONO algorithm performed the task in the case of an entangled conformation of thetrivial knot.Fig. 2  Consecutive stages of the tightening process performed by the SONO algorithm onan entangled trivial knot. The run presented in the figure lasted about 5 min. on a PCPentium 100.In spite of its apparent effectiveness the SONO algorithm performs theuntangling task in a rather awkward manner. Rather than tediously pulling out theempty loops it should just detect and cut them. Such a CutEmptyLoops proceduremay be added to the tools it uses.4.2 The Moffat testAnother test of knot tightening algorithms was suggested by Moffat. As he putit in his comment7 to Ref. 1: ”It would be interesting to test the algorithm on thesimpler  T3,2 and T2,3 configurations of the trefoil; it is not clear to me, how T3,2could flow to T2,3 through the process described.”.
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 8Fig. 3  Moffat test of the SONO algorithm. (a) the initial, loose conformation of the T3,2knot generated numerically. (k) the ground state configuration.Fig. 3 presents result of the Moffat test we performed with the SONOalgorithm. A symmetrical T3,2 initial configuration (a) was generated numerically.Then, the configuration was read by the SONO algorithm and tightened. As clearlyseen in the figure, after the very rapid initial stage, in which the loose initialconfiguration became tight (b), the evolution practically stops. The L/D and ACNparameters remain on average constant: a local minimum or saddle of the knotenergy has been reached. However, as seen in the figure as well, the L/D valuefluctuates. The fluctuations are induced mostly by the ShiftNodes procedure; let usremind that the discrete representation of the knot is not smooth, see Fig. 1. As aresult of the fluctuation the symmetry of the T3,2 configuration becomes broken (h),and the knot slips into the ideal T2,3 configuration. Let us note that the time neededto break the symmetry of the T3,2 configuration strongly depends on the number ofnodes. A considerable, temporary reduction of the number allows the operator toinitiate it. During the run presented in the figure all parameters of the SONOalgorithm remained fixed. We performed the Moffat test for other torus knots. In allstudied cases the SONO algorithm managed to break the n-fold symmetry of the Tm,nknot.4.3 The Perko Pair test
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 9Fig. 4  Evolution of knots from the Perko pair to the identical final conformation.Another test, which any algorithm aimed at finding the ideal conformations ofprime knots should pass is the ability to bring knots 10161 and 10162, the Perko pair,to a single, minimum energy conformation. The test was passed by the tools used inRef. 2. In chapter by Stasiak et al. we presented how the task of bringing the Perkopair knots to the same conformation was performed by the SONO algorithm.Initial conformations (a) of the Perko pair knots were defined by redrawing onthe screen the conformations found in „The Knot Book” by C. C. Adams, p.32. Theconformations were tightened separately with the SONO algorithm. Fig. 2 presentedin chapter by Stasiak et al. shows consecutive stages of the knots evolution. Aschecked by an additional knot comparing procedure, although differently oriented,the final conformations of the knots were identical.Fig. 4 presents the evolution of L/D for both knots. As seen in the plot, it israther the 10161 knot which has a problem with finding the proper shape; evolution ofthe 10162 knot is rapid and leads immediately to the final conformation.5 In search of ideal prime knotsFirst pictures of the ideal prime knots were presented in Ref. 2. Asmentioned above, tests we performed with the SONO algorithm revealed that someof the configurations presented were not ideal.8 Below we present a numericalexperiment which illustrates well the problems encountered during the search for theideal conformations.The first, most spectacular case is the 51 knot. Its conformation presented inRef. 2 has a 5-fold symmetry axis and L/D=24.2. SONO algorithm managed to breakthe symmetry arriving at a conformation for which L/D=23.5. Fig. 5 presents the
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 10symmetry breaking process observed in a single run lasting on a PC 100MHz about2 min. The run started from a symmetrical T2,5 conformation generated numerically(a). Initially, (a) - (c),  the evolution was very fast until the knot became tight (c).Then, the evolution stopped (c), (d), (e) - the knot entered a local energy minimum.The stable tight conformation preserves the 5-fold symmetry axis present in theinitial conformation. To induce the symmetry breaking, the δ parameter whichdetermines the distance to which the overlapping nodes are shifted by the ROprocedure was temporarily increased to 0.1 (previously it was equal 0.00001). Thisresulted in strong fluctuations of the knot conformation visible within the L/D plot.Figures (f), (g), (h), (i) present evolution of the knot shape towards the asymmetricalconformation (j).Obviously, the knot conformation (j) to which the SONO algorithm arrived inthe single run described above is not of a good quality. First of all, the number ofnodes, N=46, of which it is built is too small to provide reliable values of its L/D,ACN,  Wr parameters. In a standard procedure we apply to clean knots, its nodenumber is normalised to round(10*L/D) and the overlaps are carefully removed. Wedo not describe the cleaning procedure in more detail, although its application isquite essential if reliable data are to be obtained.
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 11Fig. 5  Symmetry breaking of the 51  torus knot observed during the tightening of the knotwith the SONO algorithm. See text.The local minimum encountered during tightening of the 51 knot has beenfound also in the case of larger T2,m knots (m1 knots in the Rolfsen classification).The Pascal code we are using allows us to study T2,m knots up to m=63.The case discussed above clearly demonstrates that the knot inflation processmay encounter problems when getting into the local minima within the thicknessenergy function. On the other hand, the case demonstrates also that the tools builtinto the SONO algorithm may in some cases allow the operator to force the knot toleave them. In the end, however, we cannot be sure if the conformation to which theknot eventually arrives is the final one, i.e. if the global energy minimum wasreached. At the present state of the art of tightening knots we must admit that wehave no certainty if the conformations to which we arrived are the ideal ones. On theother hand, due to the clear definition of the thickness energy the conformationsobtained can be compared: the lower L/D, the better.5.1 Prime knots up to 9 crossings.The race for the lowest thickness energy conformations was initiated with theMonte Carlo annealing procedure whose results were presented in Ref. 2. The bestconformations to which we arrived applying the SONO algorithm to all knots up to 8
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 12crossings are shown in the Plates 1-3. L/D,  ACN and Wr parameters of theconformations are listed in Table I found in chapter by Stasiak et al. Here we presenttwo plots covering a slightly larger range of knots.Fig. 6 The thickness energy for consecutive knots up to 9 crossings. Thickness energy isplotted in units of the rope diameter D .The first one, Fig. 6, analogous to Fig. 2 found in Ref. 4, presents the L/Dvalues of the consecutive prime knots up to 9 crossings in the order they are listed inthe Rolfsen table. In the terminology of Ref. 3, the plot presents the closed thicknessenergies in units of the rope diameter D .Note the drop, visible in Fig. 6, in the L/D value as the nonalternating knotsare reached in classes of both 8 and 9 crossing knots.
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 13Fig. 7. Average crossing number ACN of prime knots up to 9 crossings vs. L/D.Fig. 8  Writhe vs. average crossing number for all 9 crossings knots.The second plot, Fig. 7, follows the idea presented in Ref. 2 and correlates theL/D values with the average crossing number ACN. Note, that the L/D vs. ACNrelation, apparently linear at the beginning, is clearly nonlinear in a larger interval.
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 14Trying to find the quantitative description of the relation we studied larger torusknots T2,m, which in the Rolfsen notation are denoted as m1  knots, m - odd. Thenonlinearity of the ACN vs. L/D relation is clearly visible in Fig. 5 found in chapterby Stasiak et al., where we plotted data of all knots we studied.Another essential parameter which characterises optimised conformations ofknots is their writhe. Fig. 8 presents the variable correlated with the average crossingnumber. As clearly seen in the figure, the writhe is a variable, which within a familyof knots with the same minimal crossing number takes values localised near a few,well defined levels. Reasons for this quasiquantization of writhe is not clear to us.For a discussion of the writhe vs. minimal crossing number correlations see chapterby Stasiak et. al.Another problem, which puts in doubt the idea of using the parameters of theideal conformations as the knot type identifiers, is the existence of knots which beingof different type have almost identical values of their L/D, ACN and Wr parameters.This is well seen in the class of knots with MCN=9. Table 1 below presents values ofthe parameters for two pairs of knots for which the differences are smallest.Knot type L/DACN Wr  96 916  39.97  40.00  16.87  16.77  10.26  10.19  918  923  40.71  40.58  17.48  17.47  8.57  8.56Table 1 L/D, ACN and Wr parameters of two pairs of the most similar knots.The differences are below the estimated accuracy of 1% with which the L/D,ACN  and  Wr parameters are determined. (In the table the values are given withexcessive accuracy.) We are thus forced to conclude, that in practice the set of L/D,ACN and Wr values does not determine in an unambiguous manner the knot type.5.2 Tightening of the torus knots T2,mTo check the ACN vs. L/D dependence in a lager interval of L/D we tightenedwith the SONO algorithm the sequence of T2,m knots, m odd, which initiate in theRolfsen notation all classes of knots with m crossings.Initial configurations of the knots were generated numerically according toequations:z(t)=r(t) cos(2π ν1 t),x(t)=r(t) sin(2π ν2 t),y(t)=r(t) cos(2π ν2 t),wherer(t)=R0+R1 sin(2π ν1 t);
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 15R0 and R1  are the radii of the torus onto the surface of which the knot trajectory isdefined. Putting ν1=2 and ν2=m  one obtains circular conformation of the (2,m) torusknots. In what follows we shall refer to them as the T2,m  knots.Fig.10  Evolution of the T2,33 knot during the tightening process. See also Plate 4.Evolution of the L/D and ACN parameters of the knot are presented in Fig. 10.For the sake of the clarity the tube of which the knot is made is drawn has a diameterequal  D/2. The initial conformation of the knot is not shown. (a) presents thesymmetrical conformation to which the initial conformation is rapidly tightened. Asseen in (b) the SONO algorithm breaks it easily. In 8 places the arrangement of thetube becomes different. Fig 10. presents a fragment of the configuration in which 3such places are well visible. The overall shape of the knot becomes almostoctagonal; note that one side of the octagon is longer. This cannot be avoided, sincethe number of crossings is odd. This symmetry breaking leads to (c) - another typicalconformation of the knot. The existence of the longer side leads to a anotherconformation of the knot (d), which eventually stabilises (e) and (f). Conformation ofthis type is characteristic to larger T2,m knots. Is it the ideal shape, or just one of thelocal minima? As stated in Chapter by Dubochet et all., we have found that thereexists a better conformation. We discuss it in more detail in the next subsection.
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 16Fig.9 A typical arrangement of the tube in the T2,33 torus knot in which the symmetry wasbroken.5.3 Towards the ground state conformation of the T2,m knotsTightening of large T2,m knots starting from their toroidal conformationsleads to their compact, globular conformations. Experiments we performed provethat there exist better, with a lower L/D value, conformations of the knots. Fig. 11present such a conformation of the T2,33 knot.As seen in the figure, structure of the initial conformation, from which thetightening procedure starts, is utterly different from the typical conformation of torusknots. In the conformation the tube is divided into two parts: the first one, bent intothe a safety pin shape, forms the core around the second part of the tube ishelicoidally wound.The initial stage of the evolution process, during which all loose parts of thetube are shortened, is very rapid. In the next, much slower stage, the tightly packedsafety-pin conformation becomes twisted. The rate of the twist is approximately thesame in all torus knots and leads to a kind of a double-helix conformation. As notedby Stasiak9, the core part of the tube is not straight: under the pressure induced bythe outer, helicoidal part it becomes helicoidally deformed as well. Analysis of thephenomenon lead us to formulate the following problem:
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 17Fig.11 Evolution of the T2,33 knot from the safety-pin initial conformation. The initialconformation is presented in a slightly different scale.Which is the periodic conformation of two twisted together tubes, at which theL/D ratio  reaches a minimum? Answering the question may shed some light on the nature of the ground stateconformation of the T2,m torus knots. In a different wording it asks how much of thetube we need to produce two crossings. The problem is being studied by SylwesterPrzybyl10. Fig. 12 presents four different conformations he considered.Fig. 12  Four closely packed conformations of twisted tubes. L/D per one period equals,respectively: (a) 8.886,. (b) 8.5013, (c) 7.2261, (d) 7.2013. See text.Let us describe in a few words the differences between them. All of theconformation can be described parametrically by two sets of equations:
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 18x t Pt x t Ptyt R t yt R tzt R t zt R t1211 2 211 2 22222() ()() sin( ) () sin( )() cos( ) () cos( )====−==−ππππFig. 13  The simplest way of twisting two tubes together. (a) Take two straight tubes andput them in parallel so that they touch along a common line. (b) Start twisting them togetherso that they remain in touch along the initial contact line. (c) Stop twisting, when the pitchof the structure equals π - overlaps are just about to appear.In the first conformation, Fig. 13, the tubes are wound around and touch eachother along the line lying between them: R1=R2=0.5D. The pitch of the periodicstructure P=πD.  The thickness energy per period Lp/D=8.8858. By Lp we denotedhere the length of the tubes found within one period of the structure.
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 19Fig. 14  The more clever way of twisting two tubes together. (a) Take two straight tubes andput them in parallel so that they do not touch. Insert a virtual cylinder between them. (b)Start twisting them together so that they remain in touch with the virtual cylinder. (c) Donot stop twisting when the pitch reaches the π value. (d) Stop twisting, when the tubes comein touch with each other. (Do not forget to remove the virtual cylinder.)In the second conformation, Fig. 14. the radii of the spirals defining axialcurves running inside the tubes are slightly larger than the radii of the tubes:R1=R2=0.5229D. As a result, a small hole appears along the x axis. The pitch of thestructure is smaller than π: P=2.6967D. The tubes touch each other along two spiralcurves running between the tubes. The thickness energy per period Lp/D=8.5013.In the third conformation, Fig. 15, the radii of the spirals are different, buttheir sum is equal D : R1=0.97326D, R2=0.0267D. Pitch of the structure is muchsmaller than previously: P=1.0136D. The thickness energy per period Lp/D=7.2261.Note, that the value of R2 is limited by condition that the curvature of the inner spiralcannot be larger than 2/D.In the fourth and it seems best, conformation (we do not show its constructiondetails because visually it differs too little from the third one) R1=0.9670D,R2=0.0377 D , thus, their sum is larger than 1. The minimal pitch P=1.0139D. Thethickness energy per period Lp/D=7.2013.
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 20Fig. 15  Take the close packed structure obtained by procedure described in the caption ofFig. 13 and, remaining all time at the limit above which overlaps between the tubes appear,start increasing the radius of the spiral formed by one of the tubes decreasing at the sametime the radius of the spiral formed by the other one. Stop the process, when the first spiralbecomes close packed.Looking at the numbers cited above, one can immediately see the reasonsfor which the m-fold symmetry of the initial conformations of the T2,m knots must bebroken.
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 21ConclusionsThe simplest experimental procedure one can think of when trying to find themost tight conformations of a knot is to tie it on a rope and try to tighten it as muchas possible by pulling the ends of the rope. To stay in agreement with what inmathematics is meant by a knot, one cannot forget at the end of the process to cut thespare parts and join the ends of the rope together.The technique of numerical simulations provides us with a chance to performsuch experiments in a much more clean manner: using the perfectly flexible and slippery, but at the same time perfectly hard inits circular crossection rope, shortening the rope without the necessity of cutting it. The SONO algorithm we described performs the simulation task in the mostsimple and thus effective manner. Using it we managed to find more tightconformations for a few from the knots considered in Ref. 2. Unfortunately, wecannot be by no means sure if the conformations we found are the most tight ones.What makes things even worse is that for the more complex knots results of thesimulations depend on the initial conformations. We would be in a much betterposition if the ideal conformations of at least a few knots were known rigorously. (Sofar we know the rigorous solution but for a single knot – the trivial one.) We hopethat mathematicians will be able to make some progress in this direction. Without arigorous understanding of the nature of the ideal conformations the accuracy ofresults of any numerical work will remain unknown.AcknowledgementsI thank Arne Skjeltorp for introducing me to the realm of knots. My work onthe algorithm searching for the ground state of knots gained its proper intensity dueto the friendly attitude of the Lausanne group: Jacques Dubochet, Andrzej Stasiakand Vsevolod Katritch. I thank LAU for the financial support.The Pascal code of some of the procedures described in the paper wasoptimised due to help of Ben Laurie and Zdzislaw Michalski.I thank Robert McNeel & Associates for providing me with the beta version ofthe Rhinoceros software, with the use of which most knot images presented withinthe text were created.This work was carried out under KBN Project 8T11 F010 08p04.
P. Pieranski, In search of ideal knots. 22References                                                1 H. K. Moffat, 1990, The energy spectrum of knots and links., Nature 347, 367-369.2 V. Katritch, J. Bednar, D. Michoud, R. G. Sharein, J. Dubochet and A. Stasiak,1996, Geometry and physics of knots., Nature 384, 142-145.3 P. Pieranski, 1996, Search of ideal knots.,ProDialog, 5, 111 (in Polish).4 Y. Diao, C. Ernst, E. J. Janse Van Rensburg, this volume.5 A. Yu. Grosberg, A. Feigel and Y. Rabin, 1996, Flory-type teory of knotted ringpolymers., Phys. Rev. E 54, 6618.6 P. Pieranski, S. Clausen, G. Helgesen and A. T. Skjeltorp, 1996, Nonlinearphenomena in systems of magnetic holes., Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1620.7 H. K. Moffatt, 1996, Pulling the knot tight, Nature, 384, 114.8 The tests were performed in close collaboration with the Lausanne group. I amgrately obliged to Vsevolod Katritch who, at the time I started to work on primeknots, was already aware that some of the configurations he found were not the bestone and whose remarks allowed me to clean the code of the SONO algorithm fromnumerous bugs.9 Private communication.10 S. Przybył, P. Pieranski, 1998, Search of ideal knots. III Application of Maple V.4to the problem of two ropes tightly twisted together, Pro Dialog  6, 18 (in Polish)